# Event-driven Functions

Invoke javascript functions in a [Heroku app](https://www.heroku.com/platform) via [Salesforce Platform Events](https://developer.salesforce.com/docs/atlas.en-us.platform_events.meta/platform_events/platform_events_define_ui.htm).

💻👩‍🔬 *This project is a exploration into a new pattern for extending the compute capabilities of Salesforce. **Shared freely via [MIT license](LICENSE). Use at your own risk.***

* 📐 [Design](#user-content-design)
* 🏙 [Architecture](#user-content-architecture)
* 🌱 [Example](#user-content-example)
  * [Heroku function](#user-content-heroku-function)
  * [Account object](#user-content-account-object)
  * [Platform Events](#user-content-platform-events)
  * [Process Builder flows](#user-content-process-builder-flows)
* ✅ [Requirements](#user-content-requirements)
* ⚡️ [Usage](#user-content-usage)
  * [First time setup](#user-content-first-time-setup)
  * [Salesforce setup](#user-content-salesforce-setup)
  * [Run locally](#user-content-run-locally)
  * [Developing more functions](#user-content-developing-more-functions)
* 🎛 [Configuration](#user-content-configuration) via environment variables
  * [Authentication](#user-content-configure-authentication)
  * [Runtime behavior](#user-content-configure-runtime-behavior)
* 🔬 [Testing](#user-content-testing)
* 🚀 [Deployment](#user-content-deployment)
  * [Salesforce components](#user-content-deploy-salesforce-components)
  * [Heroku app](#user-content-deploy-heroku-app)

Design
------

The high-level flow is:

> Platform Event → **this app** → Platform Event

This flow maps specific **Invoke events** (topics) to function calls that return values by producing **Return events**.

> `Heroku_Function_*_Invoke__e` → Node.js function call → `Heroku_Function_*_Return__e`

These functions are composed in a Heroku app. Each function's arguments, return values, and their types must be encoded in the Invoke and Return events' fields.

Architecture
------------

This event-driven functions app is a **Node.js** app, along with an **sfdx** project providing the Salesforce customizations.

Based on [improvements to the **jsforce** Streaming module](https://github.com/jsforce/jsforce/pull/740) to support durable consumption of the Salesforce Streaming API. Those changes were merged to become **jsforce 1.9.0**.

Example
-------

This repo contains an example implementation of a UUID generator for Salesforce Accounts. This could generate UUIDs for any Salesforce object by implementing a Process Builder flow for each desired object type.

### Heroku function

Implemented in Node.js, an event-driven function is defined in the [JavaScript module `Generate_UUID`](lib/functions/Generate_UUID.js) and [registered as a function export](lib/functions/index.js).

### Account object

In **Salesforce Setup** → **Object Manager**, a custom field `UUID__c` is defined for Account.

This [UUID field](force-app/main/default/objects/Account/fields/UUID__c.field-meta.xml) is blank by default, to be filled with a universally unique external indentifier generated by the Heroku app/function.

### Platform Events

In **Salesforce Setup** → **Platform Events**, two events are defined.

#### Invoke event

Salesforce Platform Event [`Heroku_Function_Generate_UUID_Invoke__e`](force-app/main/default/objects/Heroku_Function_Generate_UUID_Invoke__e)

```json
{
  "Context_Id__c": "xxxxx"
}
```

* `Context_Id` should be passed-through unchanged from Invoke to Return. It provides an identifier to associate the return value with the original invocation
* This example  is a minimal Invoke event payload with no additional fields for function arguments. When defining the Platform Event in Salesforce Setup, it may contain as many fields as necessary
* This object is included in the Salesforce [Permission Set](force-app/main/default/permissionsets/Heroku_Function_Generate_UUID.permissionset-meta.xml) for this app.

#### Return event

Salesforce Platform Event  [`Heroku_Function_Generate_UUID_Return__e`](https://github.com/mars/event-driven-functions/tree/master/force-app/main/default/objects/Heroku_Function_Generate_UUID_Return__e)

```json
{
  "Context_Id__c": "xxxxx",
  "Value__c": "xxxxxxxx-xxxx-xxxx-xxxx-xxxxxxxxxxxxx"
}
```

* `Context_Id__c` should be passed-through unchanged from Invoke to Return
* `Value__c` is a minimal Return event payload. In this example it contains the string UUID
* This object is included in the Salesforce [Permission Set](force-app/main/default/permissionsets/Heroku_Function_Generate_UUID.permissionset-meta.xml) for this app.

👓 *About the suffixes in Salesforce identifiers: `__e` is appended to Platform Event names, and `__c` is appended to custom object & field names.*

### Process Builder flows

In **Salesforce Setup** → **Process Builder**, two flows are defined.

#### Generate UUID for Account

[The first flow](force-app/main/default/flows/Generate_UUID_for_Account-1.flow-meta.xml) triggers when creating or updating an Account that does not yet have a UUID. This publishes an [Invoke event](#user-content-invoke-event).

#### Set UUID for Account

[The second flow](force-app/main/default/flows/Set_UUID_for_Account-1.flow-meta.xml) triggers when a [Return event](#user-content-return-event) is received. This updates the Account with the returned UUID.


Requirements
------------

* [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/) 8.11 with npm 5
* [redis](https://redis.io)

Usage
-----

### First time setup

```bash
git clone https://github.com/mars/event-driven-functions.git
cd event-driven-functions/
npm install
cp .env.sample .env
```

### Salesforce setup

Next, we'll use [`sfdx`](https://developer.salesforce.com/docs/atlas.en-us.212.0.sfdx_dev.meta/sfdx_dev/sfdx_dev_intro.htm) to deploy the Salesforce customizations. If you don't yet have access to a Dev Hub org, or this is your first time using `sfdx`, then see [**Setup Salesforce DX** in Trailhead](https://trailhead.salesforce.com/trails/sfdx_get_started/modules/sfdx_app_dev/units/sfdx_app_dev_setup_dx).

Deploy the included `force-app` code to a scratch org:

```bash
sfdx force:org:create -s -f config/project-scratch-def.json -a EventDrivenFunctions
sfdx force:source:push
sfdx force:user:permset:assign -n Heroku_Function_Generate_UUID
```

View the scratch org description:

```bash
sfdx force:user:display
```

Then, update `.env` file with the **Instance Url** & **Access Token** values from the scratch org description:

```
SALESFORCE_INSTANCE_URL=xxxxx
SALESFORCE_ACCESS_TOKEN=yyyyy
```

⚠️ *Scratch orgs and their authorizations expire, so this setup may need to be repeated whenever beginning local development work. View the current status of the orgs with `sfdx force:org:list`.*

### Run locally

Open the scratch org's Accounts:

```bash
sfdx force:org:open --path one/one.app#/sObject/Account/list
```

Run this `node` command in a shell terminal:

```bash
READ_MODE=changes \
PLUGIN_NAMES=invoke-functions \
OBSERVE_SALESFORCE_TOPIC_NAMES=/event/Heroku_Function_Generate_UUID_Invoke__e \
node lib/exec
```

🔁 *This command runs continuously, listening for the Platform Event.*

▶️ Watch this command's output as your create Accounts in the scratch org.

### Developing more functions

For a given function, three identifiers are used.

* **Function Name**
  * example `Generate_UUID`
  * used for the JavaScript module file & its `functions` export
* **Invoke Event Name**
  * example `Heroku_Function_Generate_UUID_Invoke__e`
  * used for the Platform Event that runs the function
* **Return Event Name**
  * example `Heroku_Function_Generate_UUID_Return__e`
  * used for the Platform Event that receives the function's result

Note: the **Function Name** must be embedded exactly in both **Event Names**.

To implement a new function:

1. create the new Platform Events using `sfdx` workflow
   * develop in a scratch org and pull changes into this repo
   * define each **Invoke & Return Event** and its schema (fields & their types)
   * define a new **Permission Set** for access or add to an existing Set
1. create the function as a default export in `lib/functions/`
   * use **Function Name** for the module file & its `functions` export
   * the function receives the Invoke event's payload and must honor the Return event's schema
   * see: [example `Generate_UUID.js`](lib/functions/Generate_UUID.js) & [the export](lib/functions/index.js)
1. include the new Invoke Event Name in `OBSERVE_SALESFORCE_TOPIC_NAMES` env var
   * example: `OBSERVE_SALESFORCE_TOPIC_NAMES=/event/Heroku_Function_Generate_UUID_Invoke__e,/event/Heroku_Function_Generate_Haiku_Invoke__e`

Configuration
-------------

### Configure Authentication

Performed based on environment variables. Either of the following authentication methods may be used:

* Username + password
  * `SALESFORCE_USERNAME`
  * `SALESFORCE_PASSWORD` (password+securitytoken)
  * `SALESFORCE_LOGIN_URL` (optional; defaults to **login.salesforce.com**)
* Existing OAuth token
  * `SALESFORCE_INSTANCE_URL`
  * `SALESFORCE_ACCESS_TOKEN`
  * Retrieve from an [sfdx](https://developer.salesforce.com/docs/atlas.en-us.212.0.sfdx_dev.meta/sfdx_dev/sfdx_dev_intro.htm) scratch org with:

    ```bash
    sfdx force:org:create -s -f config/project-scratch-def.json -a EventDrivenFunctions
    sfdx force:org:display
    ```
* OAuth client
  * `SALESFORCE_URL`
    * *Must include oAuth client ID, secret, & refresh token*
    * Example: `force://{client-id}:{secret}:{refresh-token}@{instance-name}.salesforce.com`

### Configure Runtime Behavior

* `VERBOSE`
  * enable detailed runtime logging to stderr
  * example: `VERBOSE=true`
  * default value: unset, no log output
* `PLUGIN_NAMES`
  * configure the consumers/observers of the Salesforce data streams
  * example: `PLUGIN_NAMES=invoke-functions`
  * default value: `console-output`
* `OBSERVE_SALESFORCE_TOPIC_NAMES`
  * the path part of a Streaming API URL
  * a comma-delimited list
  * example: `OBSERVE_SALESFORCE_TOPIC_NAMES=/event/Heroku_Function_Generate_UUID_Invoke__e`
  * default value: no Salesforce observer
* `REDIS_URL`
  * connection config to Redis datastore
  * example: `REDIS_URL=redis://localhost:6379`
  * default: unset, no Redis
* `REPLAY_ID`
  * force a specific replayId for Salesforce Streaming API
  * ensure to unset this after usage to prevent the stream from sticking
  * example: `REPLAY_ID=5678` (or `-2` for all possible events)
  * default: unset, receive all new events

Testing
-------

Implemented with [AVA](https://github.com/avajs/ava), concurrent test runner.

`npm test` runs only unit tests. It skips integration tests, because Salesforce and AWS config is not automated.

### Unit Tests

* `npm run test:unit`
* Defined in `lib/` alongside source files
* Salesforce API calls are mocked by way of [Episode 7](https://github.com/mars/episode-7)


Deployment
----------

### Deploy Salesforce components

#### Example, ready-to-install package from this repo

```bash
sfdx force:auth:web:login -a AnotherOrg
sfdx force:package:install --id 04tf4000001ft4hAAA -u AnotherOrg
```

#### Custom, package it yourself

##### 2nd-generation unnamespaced, unlocked package (2GP)

Based on [Salesforce DX 2GP docs](https://developer.salesforce.com/docs/atlas.en-us.sfdx_dev.meta/sfdx_dev/sfdx_dev_dev2gp_workflow.htm):

```bash
sfdx force:package2:create --name Event_Driven_Functions_Generate_UUID_2GP_sans_NS --description "Integration with event-driven-functions Heroku app" --containeroptions Unlocked --nonamespace
```

In `sfdx-project.json`, update `packageDirectories`.`0`.`id` with the output `Package2 Id`:

```json
{
  "packageDirectories": [
    {
      "path": "force-app",
      "default": true,
      "id": "0Hof4000000blNuCAI",
      "versionName": "Initial 2GP",
      "versionNumber": "1.0.0"
    }
  ],
  "namespace": "",
  "sfdcLoginUrl": "https://login.salesforce.com",
  "sourceApiVersion": "42.0"
}
```

```bash
sfdx force:package2:version:create --directory force-app --wait 10
sfdx force:package:install --id <Subscriber Package2 Version Id> -u OrgAliasOrUserId --wait 10 --publishwait 10
sfdx force:org:open -u EventDrivenFunctions
```



##### 1st-generation unmanaged (unnamespaced) package

Follow [Build and Release Your App with Managed Packages](https://developer.salesforce.com/docs/atlas.en-us.sfdx_dev.meta/sfdx_dev/sfdx_dev_build_man_pack.htm) to prepare a packaging org.

Diverging from those directions, we'll prepare an unmanaged package without a namespace. We have to skip namespacing for now, because of problems with Process Builder + Platform Events embedding namespaces in the metadata (evidence [1](NOTES.md#user-content-push-to-scratch-org-error), [2](NOTES.md#user-content-manually-pruned-package-fails-to-install)). <del>[Link its namespace with your Hub org](https://developer.salesforce.com/docs/atlas.en-us.sfdx_dev.meta/sfdx_dev/sfdx_dev_reg_namespace.htm), and set the established `"namespace"` in [sfdx-project.json](sfdx-project.json), and then [provision & push to a fresh scratch org](#user-content-salesforce-setup).</del>

Now, pull the Salesforce customizations back out of the scratch org in the Metadata API format:

```bash
sfdx force:source:convert --outputdir mdapi_output_dir --packagename Event_Driven_Functions_Generate_UUID
```

Login to the packaging org and create the Beta package:

```bash
sfdx force:org:list
sfdx force:auth:web:login -a PkgFunctions

sfdx force:mdapi:deploy --deploydir mdapi_output_dir --targetusername PkgFunctions

# Find the package ID in the URL of the packaging org:
#   Setup → Package Manager → View/Edit the Package
sfdx force:package1:version:create --packageid XXXXX --name r00000 -u PkgFunctions

sfdx force:package1:version:list -u PkgFunctions
```

Install the beta package into another org by its id `METADATAPACKAGEVERSIONID`:

```bash
sfdx force:auth:web:login -a AnotherOrg
sfdx force:package:install --id YYYYY -u AnotherOrg
```


### Deploy Heroku app

```bash
heroku create

heroku config:set \
  SALESFORCE_USERNAME=mmm@mmm.mmm \
  SALESFORCE_PASSWORD=nnnnnttttt \
  VERBOSE=true \
  PLUGIN_NAMES=invoke-functions \
  OBSERVE_SALESFORCE_TOPIC_NAMES=/event/Heroku_Function_Generate_UUID_Invoke__e \
  READ_MODE=changes

heroku addons:create heroku-redis:premium-0

git push heroku master

heroku ps:scale web=0:Standard-1x worker=1:Standard-1x
```
